



Satish Kumar has led an extraordinary life. Born in a small town in Rajasthan,
India, he left his family home at the age of just nine to join the wandering
Jains. He tells us that he was motivated to do so when, devastated by the
sudden death of his father, he met a Jain monk who told him that by renouncing
the world and following the way of the monks he could free himself from death
and attain nirvana.




For the following nine years, the young Satish lived the rigorous life of a
Jain monk, walking every day, never bathing, fasting frequently, and spending
long hours in daily meditation. Then, at the age of eighteen, he secretly read
in a book by Mahatma Gandhi that spirituality could be practiced by serving
the world rather than renouncing it. Satish was so inspired by Gandhi’s
teaching that he left the Jain order and joined the Gandhian ashram of Vinoba
Bhave, a close friend of Gandhi.




With Vinoba, Satish walked hundreds of miles campaigning for land reform in
India. “As a monk,” he writes, “I learned the art of walking, fasting,
thinking, and meditating. At the ashram in Bodhgaya, I learned the art of
making: cooking, gardening, and spinning cotton into yarn to make my own
clothes. With Vinoba I learned how to meditate and with a friend decided to go
on a pilgrimage for peace, inspired by the British philosopher and peace
activist Bertrand Russell.” Starting from Gandhi’s grave in New Delhi, he and
a fellow monk walked to Moscow, Paris, London, and Washington, D. C.—the
capitals of the four nuclear powers. Carrying no money and depending on the
kindness and hospitality of strangers, they were on the road for over two
years, walking over 8,000 miles.




In 1973, Satish Kumar settled in the United Kingdom, taking up the post as
editor of _Resurgence_ magazine. In this capacity, he published a series of
articles by E. F. Schumacher, the celebrated author of _Small Is Beautiful_ ,
and over the years, he turned _Resurgence_ into one of the most important and
most beautiful ecological magazines. During the same time, Satish (as he is
known to his friends and disciples around the world) inspired, originated, and
directed a series of ecologically oriented projects, all of them tremendously
successful. They include The Small School for the community of Hartland in
North Devon, where he lives; the annual series of Schumacher Lectures; and
Schumacher College, the celebrated center for ecological studies in South
Devon.




I have been privileged to know Satish as a friend and colleague for over 30
years, and I have often wondered about the secret of his success in so many
ventures. I think Satish gives us an answer in this book. _Elegant Simplicity_
is his meditation on the nature of spirituality, seen through the lens of
simplicity and based on his rich, lifelong experiences as a monk, Gandhian
activist, eco-philosopher, educator, and spiritual teacher.




